Add babeldown tech note (#633)
ropensci/roweb3: content/blog/2023-09-05-how-to-translate-a-hugo-blog-post-with-babeldown/index.Rmd

Reviewer: Reminder to update the folder name to match the date

Author: thank you :pray:

```r
Sys.setenv(DEEPL_API_KEY = keyring::key_get("deepl"))
```

Lastly, the DeepL API URL depends on your API plan. 
babeldown uses the DeepL free API URL by default. 
If you use a Pro plan, set the API URL in each R session/script via

```r
Sys.setenv("DEEPL_API_URL" = "https://api.deepl.com")
```

## Translation!

You could run the code below

```r
babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo(
  post_path = <path-to-post>, # or omit this parameter if the file is the one open and focused in RStudio IDE (the one you see above your console)!
  source_lang = "EN",
  target_lang = "ES",
  formality = "less" # that's we roll here!
)
```

but we'd recommend a tad more work for your own good.

### A workflow for Git and GitHub

If you use version control, having the translation as a diff is very handy!

#### In words

- In the branch of your post, let's say "new-post", create a placeholder: save your original blog post under the target blog post name and commit it, then push.
- Create a new branch.
- Run `babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()` with `force = TRUE`.
- Commit and push the result. 
- Open a PR from the **"translation-tech-note"** branch to the **"new-post"** branch. 

> The only difference between the two branches is the automatic translation of `"2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.en.md"`.. The diff for the target blog post will be the diff between the source and target language! If you have the good habit to start a new line after each sentence / sentence part, it's even better.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only difference between the two branches is the automatic translation of `"2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md"`.. The diff for the target blog post will be the diff between the source and target language! If you have the good habit to start a new line after each sentence / sentence part, it's even better.
```

- The human translators can then a open a second PR to the translation branch with their edits!

#### In code

With code using fs and gert (but you do you!), assuming your current directory is the root of the website folder, and also the root of the git repository, and a translation from Spanish to English...

- In the post branch, let's call it "new-post", save your original blog post under the target blog post name and commit it, then push.

```r
fs::file_copy(

>   file.path("content", "blog", "2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.es.md"),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.es.md"),
```

>   file.path("content", "blog", "2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.en.md")

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md")
```

)

> gert::git_add(file.path("content", "blog", "2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.en.md"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gert::git_add(file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md"))
```

gert::git_commit("Add translation placeholder")
gert::git_push()
```

- Create a new branch.

```r
gert::git_branch_create("translation-tech-note")
```

- Run `babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()` with `force = TRUE`.

```r
babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo(

>   post_path = file.path("content", "blog", "2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.es.md"),

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  post_path = file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.es.md"),
```

  force = TRUE,
  yaml_fields = c("title", "description", "tags"),
  source_lang = "ES",
  target_lang = "EN-US"
)
```

You can also omit the `post_path` argument if you're running the code from RStudio IDE and if the open and focused file (the one you see above your console) is the post to be translated.

```r
babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo(
  force = TRUE,
  yaml_fields = c("title", "description", "tags"),
  source_lang = "ES",
  target_lang = "EN-US"
)
```

- Commit the result with the code below.

```r

> gert::git_add(file.path("content", "blog", "2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.en.md"))

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
gert::git_add(file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md"))
```

gert::git_commit("Add translation")
gert::git_push()
```

- Open a PR from the **"translation-tech-note"** branch to the **"new-post"** branch. 

> The only difference between the two branches is the automatic translation of `"2023-08-24-divide-y-venceras-de-polar-al-polarverse", "index.en.md"`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The only difference between the two branches is the automatic translation of `"2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md"`.
```

---
title: How to Translate a Hugo Blog Post with Babeldown
author: 
- Maëlle Salmon
- Yanina Bellini Saibene

> date: '2023-09-05'

Reviewer: Reminder to update the date

slug: how-to-translate-a-hugo-blog-post-with-babeldown
categories: []
tags:
  - tech notes
  - multilingual
---

> As part of our [multilingual publishing project](/multilingual-publishing/), and with [funding from the R Consortium](https://www.r-consortium.org/all-projects/awarded-projects/2022-group-2), we've worked on the R package [babeldown](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/) for translation of Markdown based content through the DeepL API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of our [multilingual publishing project](/multilingual-publishing/), and with [funding from the R Consortium](https://www.r-consortium.org/all-projects/awarded-projects/2022-group-2), we've worked on the R package [babeldown](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/) for translating Markdown-based content using the DeepL API.
```

> In this tech note, we'll see how to use babeldown to translate a Hugo blog post!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tech note, we'll show how you can use babeldown to translate a Hugo blog post!
```

## Motivation

> Translating a blog post from your R console is not only more comfortable when you've already written said blog post in R.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Translating a markdown blog post from your R console is not only more comfortable (when you've already written said blog post in R), but also less frustrating.
```

With babeldown, compared to copy-pasting the content of a blog post into some translation service, the Markdown syntax won't be broken[^md], and code chunks won't be translated.

> Under the hood, babeldown uses [tinkr](https://docs.ropensci.org/tinkr) to produce XML to send to the DeepL API, flagging some tags as not to be translated, and to convert the XML translated by DeepL into Markdown again.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This works, because under the hood, babeldown uses [tinkr](https://docs.ropensci.org/tinkr) to produce XML which it then sends to the DeepL API, flagging some tags as not to be translated. It then converts the XML translated by DeepL back into Markdown again.
```

> [^md]: Refer to [tinkr docs](https://docs.ropensci.org/tinkr/#loss-of-markdown-style) to see what might change in the Markdown syntax style.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[^md]: But you should refer to [tinkr docs](https://docs.ropensci.org/tinkr/#loss-of-markdown-style) to see what might change in the Markdown syntax style.
```

> Now, obviously, machine-translated content isn't perfect yet!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now, as you might expect this machine-translated content isn't perfect yet!
```

> A human or two will need to review and amend the translation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You will still need a human or two to review and amend the translation.
```

Why not have the humans translate the post from scratch then?

> We have observed that editing an automatic translation is faster than translating the whole post, and that it frees up mental space for implementing translation rules such as gender-neutral phrasing.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have observed that editing an automatic translation is faster than translating the whole post, and that it frees up mental space for focusing on implementing translation rules such as gender-neutral phrasing.
```

## Setup

### Pre-requisites on the Hugo website

`babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()` assumes the Hugo website uses

- leaf bundles (each post in a folder, `content/path-to-leaf-bundle/index.md`);

> - multilingualism so that a post in say Spanish lives in `content/path-to-leaf-bundle/index.es.md`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- multilingualism so that a post in (for example) Spanish lives in `content/path-to-leaf-bundle/index.es.md`.
```

> We could envision extending this to other Hugo multilingual setups, please open an issue in [babeldown repository](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/babeldown/) if you'd be interested in using babeldown for a Hugo website you set up differently.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
babeldown could be extended work with other Hugo multilingual setups. If you'd be interested in using babeldown with a different setup, please open an issue in the [babeldown repository](https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/babeldown/)!
```

> Note that babeldown won't be able to determine the default language of your website[^config] so even if your website's default language is English, babeldown will place an English translation in a file ".en.md" not ".md".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that babeldown won't be able to determine the default language of your website[^config] so even if your website's default language is English, babeldown will place an English translation in a file called ".en.md" not ".md".
```

[^config]: adding code to handle Hugo's ["bewildering array of possible config locations"](https://github.com/r-lib/hugodown/issues/14#issuecomment-632850506) and two possible formats (YAML and TOML) is out of scope for babeldown at this point.

### DeepL pre-requisites

> First check your desired source and target languages are supported by the DeepL API!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First check that your desired source and target languages are supported by the DeepL API!
```

Look up the [docs of the `source_lang` and `target_lang` API parameters](https://www.deepl.com/docs-api/translate-text) for a full list.

> Once you know you'll be able to take advantage of the DeepL API, you'll need to create an account for the [API of the translation service DeepL](https://www.deepl.com/en/docs-api/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you know you'll be able to take advantage of the DeepL API, you'll need to create an account for [DeepL's translation service API](https://www.deepl.com/en/docs-api/).
```

> Even getting a free account demands registering a payment method with them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that even getting a free account requires registering a payment method with them.
```

### R pre-requisites

You'll need to install babeldown from rOpenSci R-universe:

```r
install.packages('babeldown', repos = c('https://ropensci.r-universe.dev', 'https://cloud.r-project.org'))
```

Then, in each R session, set your DeepL API key via the environment variable DEEPL_API_KEY. You could store it once and for all with the [keyring](https://r-lib.github.io/keyring/index.html) package and retrieve it in your scripts like so:

> ```r

Reviewer: Could you not also set your default language with an Environmental variable (or even an option)? Not that it's really difficult to rename files, but...?

Author: https://github.com/ropensci-review-tools/babeldown/issues/48

Sys.setenv(DEEPL_API_KEY = keyring::key_get("deepl"))
```

Lastly, the DeepL API URL depends on your API plan. 
babeldown uses the DeepL free API URL by default. 
If you use a Pro plan, set the API URL in each R session/script via

```r
Sys.setenv("DEEPL_API_URL" = "https://api.deepl.com")
```

## Translation!

You could run the code below

```r
babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo(

>   post_path = <path-to-post>, # or omit this parameter if the file is the one open and focused in RStudio IDE (the one you see above your console)!

Reviewer: Because you explain this below, I think you could omit it here
```suggestion
  post_path = <path-to-post>, 
```

  source_lang = "EN",
  target_lang = "ES",

>   formality = "less" # that's we roll here!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  formality = "less" # that's how we roll here!
```

)
```

but we'd recommend a tad more work for your own good.

> ### A workflow for Git and GitHub

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Translation using a Git/GitHub workflow
```

If you use version control, having the translation as a diff is very handy!

> #### In words and pictures

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### First: In words and pictures
```

> - In the branch of your post, let's say "new-post", create a placeholder: save your original blog post under the target blog post name and commit it, then push.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the branch of your post (let's call it "new-post") create a placeholder: save your original blog post (`index.es.md`) under the target blog post name (`index.en.md`) and commit it, then push.
```

- Create a new branch, "auto-translate" for instance.
- Run `babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()` with `force = TRUE`.

{{< figure src="translate.png" alt="Diagram with on the left the leaf folder in the auto-translate branch with the post in Spanish with the text 'hola', the post with the English target filename with the text 'hola', and the image; on the right the only thing that changed is that the content of the post with the English target filename is now 'hello'." >}}

- Commit and push the result. 
- Open a PR from the **"translation-tech-note"** branch to the **"new-post"** branch. 
The only difference between the two branches is the automatic translation of your post. The diff for the target blog post will be the diff between the source and target languages! If you have the good habit to start a new line after each sentence / sentence part, it's even better.

{{< figure src="pr.png" alt="Drawing of the pull request from the auto-translate to the new-post branch where the difference is that the content of the post with the English target filename has now been translated to English." >}}

> - The human translators can then a open a second PR to the translation branch with their edits!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The human translators can then a open a second PR to the translation branch with their edits! Or they can add their edits as [PR suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-comments-to-a-pull-request).
```

> #### In code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Again: In code
```

> With code using fs and gert (but you do you!), assuming your current directory is the root of the website folder, and also the root of the git repository, and a translation from Spanish to English...

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now let's go over this again, but with a coding workflow. Here, we'll use fs and gert (but you do you!), and we'll assume your current directory is the root of the website folder, and also the root of the git repository.
```

> - In the post branch, let's call it "new-post", save your original blog post under the target blog post name and commit it, then push.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- In the post branch, (again, let's call it "new-post"), save your original blog post (`index.es.md`) under the target blog post name (`index.en.md`) and commit it, then push.
```

```r
fs::file_copy(
  file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.es.md"),
  file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md")
)
gert::git_add(file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md"))
gert::git_commit("Add translation placeholder")
gert::git_push()
```

> - Create a new branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create a new branch, "auto-translate" for instance.
```

  yaml_fields = c("title", "description", "tags"),
  source_lang = "ES",
  target_lang = "EN-US"
)
```

You can also omit the `post_path` argument if you're running the code from RStudio IDE and if the open and focused file (the one you see above your console) is the post to be translated.

```r
babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo(
  force = TRUE,
  yaml_fields = c("title", "description", "tags"),
  source_lang = "ES",
  target_lang = "EN-US"
)
```

- Commit the result with the code below.

```r
gert::git_add(file.path("content", "blog", "2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews", "index.en.md"))
gert::git_commit("Add translation")
gert::git_push()
```

- Open a PR from the **"translation-tech-note"** branch to the **"new-post"** branch. 
The only difference between the two branches is the automatic translation of `"content/blog/2023-10-01-r-universe-interviews/index.en.md"`.

- The human translators can then a open a _second_ PR to the translation branch with their edits! Or they can add their edits as [PR suggestions](https://docs.github.com/en/pull-requests/collaborating-with-pull-requests/reviewing-changes-in-pull-requests/commenting-on-a-pull-request#adding-comments-to-a-pull-request).

> #### Summary of branches and PRs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Summary of branches and PRs
```

In the end there should be two to three branches:
- branch A with blog post in Spanish and placeholder blog post for English (with Spanish content) -- PR to main;
- branch B with blog post automatically translated to English -- PR to branch A;
- Optionally branch C with blog post's English automatic translation edited by a human -- PR to branch B. If branch C does not exist, edits by a human are made as PR review suggestions in the PR from B to A.

The PR are merged in this order:

- PR to branch B;
- PR to branch A;
- PR to main.

> #### Real example

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Real example
```

- [PR adding a post to the rOpenSci blog](https://github.com/ropensci/roweb3/pull/629), notice it's a PR from the **"r-universe-interviews"** branch to the **"main" (default)** branch;
- [PR adding the automatic translation](https://github.com/ropensci/roweb3/pull/639), notice it's a PR to the **"r-universe-interviews"** branch.

{{< figure src="pr-diff.png" alt="Screenshot of the files tab of the pull request adding the automatic translation, where we observe Spanish text in the YAML metadata and Markdown content has been translated to English." >}}

Yanina tweaked the automatic translation by suggesting changes on the PR, then accepting them.

{{< figure src="pr-comments.png" alt="Screenshot of the main tab of the pull request adding the automatic translation, where we observe a comment by Yanina replacing the word 'article' with 'blog post' and fixing the name of 'R-universe'." >}}

### YAML fields

By default babeldown translates the YAML fields "title" and "description". 
If you have text in more of them, use the `yaml_fields` argument of `babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()`.

Note that if babeldown translates the title, it updates the slug.

### Glossary

> Image you have a few preferences for some words -- something you'll build up over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine you have a few preferences for some words -- something you'll build up over time.
```

```r
deepl_upsert_glossary(
  <path-to-csv-file>,
  glossary_name = "rstats-glosario",
  target_lang = "Spanish",
  source_lang = "English"
)
```

You'd use the exact same code to _update_ the glossary hence the name "upsert" for the function.
You need one glossary per source language / target language pair: the English-Spanish glossary can't be used for Spanish to English for instance.

In your `babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()` call you then use the glossary name (here "rstats-glosario") for the `glossary` argument. 

### Formality

`deepl_translate_hugo()` has a `formality` argument.
Now, the DeepL API only supports this for some languages as explained in the [documentation of the `formality` API parameter](https://www.deepl.com/docs-api/translate-text): 

> Sets whether the translated text should lean towards formal or informal language. This feature currently only works for target languages DE (German), FR (French), IT (Italian), ES (Spanish), NL (Dutch), PL (Polish), PT-BR and PT-PT (Portuguese), JA (Japanese), and RU (Russian). (...) Setting this parameter with a target language that does not support formality will fail, unless one of the prefer_... options are used. 

> Therefore to be sure a translation will work, instead of writing `formality = "less"` you should write `formality = "prefer_less"`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Therefore to be sure a translation will work, instead of writing `formality = "less"` you can write `formality = "prefer_less"` which will only use formality if available.
```

## Conclusion

In this post we explained how to translate a Hugo blog post using babeldown.
Although the gist is to use one call to `babeldown::deepl_translate_hugo()`,
- one needs to indicate the API URL and key, 
- one can improve results by using the function's different arguments,
- we recommend pairing the translation with a Git + GitHub (or GitLab, gitea...) workflow.

> babeldown has [functions](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/reference/index.html) for translating Quarto book chapters, any Markdown file, any Markdown string, with similar arguments and recommended usage, so explore its reference!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
babeldown has [functions](https://docs.ropensci.org/babeldown/reference/index.html) for translating Quarto book chapters, any Markdown file, and any Markdown string, with similar arguments and recommended usage, so explore its reference!
```
